Invantion of diabetes:The term diabetes was probably coined by Apollonius of Memphis around 250 BC. Diabetes is first recorded in English, in the form diabete, in a medical text written around 1425. It was in 1675 that Thomas Willis added the word “'mellitus'” to the word diabetes. This was because of the sweet taste of the urine.

Side effects of diabetes medicine: 
Probably you can suffer from
Sulfonylureas: low blood sugar, upset stomach, skin rash or itching, weight gain.

Biguanides/Metformin: sickness with alcohol, kidney complications, upset stomach, tiredness or dizziness, metal taste.

Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors: gas, bloating and diarrhoea.



what is diabetes:
Diabetes is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes from the food you eat. 
Insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas, helps glucose from food get into your cells to be used for energy. 
Sometimes your body doesn’t make enough—or any—insulin or doesn’t use insulin well. 
Glucose then stays in your blood and doesn’t reach your cells.
Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause health problems. 
Although diabetes has no cure, you can take steps to manage your diabetes and stay healthy.Sometimes people call diabetes “a touch of sugar” or “borderline diabetes”. These terms suggest that someone doesn’t really have diabetes or has a less serious case, but every case of diabetes is serious.


Types of Diabetes: 
Type 1 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes
Gestational diabetes


Type 1 diabetes: 
If you have type 1 diabetes, your body does not make insulin.
Your immune system attacks and destroys the cells in your pancreas that make insulin. 
Type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults, although it can appear at any age. 
People with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day to stay alive.

Type 2 diabetes:
If you have type 2 diabetes, your body does not make or use insulin well.
You can develop type 2 diabetes at any age, even during childhood.
However, this type of diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people.
Type 2 is the most common type of diabetes.

Gestational diabetes:
Gestational diabetes develops in some women when they are pregnant. 
Most of the time, this type of diabetes goes away after the baby is born.
However, if you’ve had gestational diabetes, you have a greater chance of developing type 2 diabetes later in life.
Sometimes diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy is actually type 2 diabetes.


What is sugar level:
NORMAL AND DIABETIC BLOOD SUGAR RANGES
For the majority of healthy individuals, normal blood sugar levels are as follows:
Between 4.0 to 5.4 mmol/L (72 to 99 mg/dL) when fasting [361]
Up to 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL) 2 hours after eating
For people with diabetes, blood sugar level targets are as follows:
Before meals : 4 to 7 mmol/L for people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
After meals : under 9 mmol/L for people with type 1 diabetes and under 8.5mmol/L for people with type 2 diabetes.




Health Problems:
Heart disease, Stroke, Kidney disease, Eye problems, Dental disease, Nerve damage, Foot problems


Common symptoms of diabetes:
Urinating often
Feeling very thirsty
Feeling very hungry—even though you are eating
Extreme fatigue
Blurry vision
Cuts/bruises that are slow to heal
Weight loss—even though you are eating more (type 1)
Tingling, pain, or numbness in the hands/feet (type 2)

Symptoms of diabetes in men:
In addition to the general symptoms of diabetes, men with diabetes may have a decreased sex drive, erectile dysfunction (ED), and poor muscle strength.

Symptoms in diabetes in women:
Women with diabetes can also have symptoms such as urinary tract infections, yeast infections, and dry, itchy skin.


Causes of diabetes:
Doctors don’t know exactly what causes type 1 diabetes. 
For some reason, the immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas.
Genes may play a role in some people.
It’s also possible that a virus sets off the immune system attack.

Causes of Type 1 diabetes:
We know that sugar does not cause type 1 diabetes, nor is it caused by anything else in your lifestyle. 
In type 1 diabetes, the insulin producing cells in your pancreas are destroyed by your immune system.


Bliendness in Diabetes:
People will go blind, be forced to go on dialysis or have their limbs amputated.
In fact, diabetes is the leading cause of non-injury amputations in adults, of blindness in working-age adults, and of adult kidney disease.


Is juvenile diabetes curable:
There is no cure for diabetes. Neither type 1 (juvenile onset or insulin-requiring) diabetes or type 2 (adult-onset) diabetes ever goes away.
In type 1 diabetes, patients sometimes experience what physicians have come to call a "honeymoon period" shortly after the disease is diagnosed.

What Happens to Your Body When You Have Diabetes:
When the pancreas is no longer able to make insulin, or when the body has trouble making good use of the insulin it produces, diabetes may develop, according to the International Diabetes Federation. “The thing is that being insulin dependent is kind of like doing math all day while walking on a tight rope between two high buildings,” said Jeff Dachis, founder and CEO of One Drop, of being diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes. “Too little insulin, and I die slowly over time due to the complications of diabetes. Too much insulin and I can drop into a coma and die instantly. So, you have to get it right”. Early detection and treatment can reduce the chances of developing further complications of diabetes. There are also diet changes you may make to reduce your risk for diabetes, some of which include avoiding processed and packaged foods, eating more protein, cutting down on sodium, and eating more healthy fats.



Preventations of diabetes:
Weight loss, Healthy eating, Regular exercise Possibly, Diabetes medication or insulin therapy, Blood sugar monitoring
Get at least 150 minutes per week of aerobic exercise, such as walking or cycling. Cut saturated and trans fats, along with refined carbohydrates, out of your diet. Eat more fruits, vegetables, and whole grains.


Diabetes in pregnancy:
Women who’ve never had diabetes can suddenly develop gestational diabetes in pregnancy. Hormones produced by the placenta can make your body more resistant to the effects of insulin.
Some women who had diabetes before they conceived carry it with them into pregnancy. This is called pre-gestational diabetes.Gestational diabetes should go away after you deliver, but it does significantly increase your risk for getting diabetes later. About half of women with gestational diabetes will develop type 2 diabetes within 5 to 10 years of delivery, according to the International Diabetes Federation (IDF). Having diabetes during your pregnancy can also lead to complications for your newborn, such as jaundice or breathing problems.If you’re diagnosed with pre-gestational or gestational diabetes, you’ll need special monitoring to prevent complications. Find out more about the effect of diabetes on pregnancy.



Diabetes facts & figures:In 2019,
Approximately 463 million adults (20-79 years) were living with diabetes; by 2045 this will rise to 700 million
The proportion of people with type 2 diabetes is increasing in most countries
79% of adults with diabetes were living in low- and middle-income countries
1 in 5 of the people who are above 65 years old have diabetes
1 in 2 (232 million) people with diabetes were undiagnosed
Diabetes caused 4.2 million deaths
Diabetes caused at least USD 760 billion dollars in health expenditure in 2019 – 10% of total spending on adults
More than 1.1 million children and adolescents are living with type 1 diabetes
More than 20 million live births (1 in 6 live births) are affected by diabetes during pregnancy
374 million people are at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes




Home remedies for diabetes:
Commit to managing your diabetes. Learn all you can about type 2 diabetes. Make healthy eating and physical activity part of your daily routine. Establish relationship with a diabetes educator, and ask your diabetes treatment team for help when you need it.
Identify yourself. Wear a necklace or bracelet that says you have diabetes, especially if you take insulin or other blood sugar-lowering medication.
Schedule a yearly physical exam and regular eye exams. Your regular diabetes checkups aren't meant to replace regular physicals or routine eye exams.
Keep your vaccinations up to date. High blood sugar can weaken your immune system. Get a flu shot every year. Your doctor will likely also recommend the pneumonia vaccine.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also recommends the hepatitis B vaccination if you haven't previously received this vaccine and you're an adult between ages 19 and 59 with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. The CDC advises vaccination as soon as possible after diagnosis with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. If you are age 60 or older, have diabetes and haven't previously received the vaccine, talk to your doctor about whether it's right for you.
Take care of your teeth. Diabetes may leave you prone to more-serious gum infections. Brush and floss your teeth regularly and schedule recommended dental exams. Consult your dentist right away if your gums bleed or look red or swollen.
Pay attention to your feet. Wash your feet daily in lukewarm water, dry them gently, especially between the toes, and moisturize them with lotion. Check your feet every day for blisters, cuts, sores, redness and swelling. Consult your doctor if you have a sore or other foot problem that isn't healing.
Keep your blood pressure and cholesterol under control. Eating healthy foods and exercising regularly can go a long way toward controlling high blood pressure and cholesterol. Medication also may be needed.
If you smoke or use other types of tobacco, ask your doctor to help you quit. Smoking increases your risk of various diabetes complications. Talk to your doctor about ways to stop smoking or using other types of tobacco.
If you drink alcohol, do so responsibly. Alcohol, as well as drink mixers, can cause either high or low blood sugar, depending on how much you drink and if you eat at the same time. If you choose to drink, do so in moderation and always with a meal.



Diabetes in children:
Children can get both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Controlling blood sugar is especially important in young people, because the disease can damage important organs such as the heart and kidneys.



How many Diabetic Patients in India:Government survey found 11.8% prevalence of diabetes in total population of India.


How are type 1 and type 2 diabetes diagnosed?
The primary test used to diagnose both type 1 and type 2 diabetes is known as the A1C, or glycated hemoglobin, test.This blood test determines your average blood sugar level for the past 2 to 3 months. Your doctor may draw your blood or give you a small finger prick.The higher your blood sugar levels have been over the past few months, the higher your A1C level will be. Test results are expressed as a percentage. An A1C level of 6.5 percent or higher indicates diabetes.
The A1C test isn’t accurate for people with sickle cell anemia or the sickle cell trait. If you have this condition or trait, then your doctor will have to use a different test.



What doctor can ask:
Do you understand your treatment plan and feel confident you can follow it?
How are you coping with diabetes?
Have you experienced any low blood sugar?
Do you know what to do if your blood sugar is too low or too high?
What's a typical day's diet like?
Are you exercising? If so, what type of exercise? How often?
Do you sit for long periods of time?
What challenges are you experiencing in managing your diabetes?


Natural remedies:
Apple Cider Vinegar, Fiber and Barley, Chromium, Zinc, Aloe Vera, Berberine, Cinnamon, Fenugreek, Gymnema, Nopal



1. Apple Cider Vinegar
The primary compound in ACV is acetic acid and is believed to be responsible for many of its health benefits.   There are many evidence-based approaches to using ACV.  Taking 2 tablespoons before bedtime can reduce your morning fasting sugar levels.   Even better, 1-2 tablespoons of ACV taken with meals can decrease the glycemic load of a carbohydrate rich meal.   I generally tell patients to either consume ACV alone, prior to a meal or mix it into salad dressings or teas.  
2. Fiber and Barley
Eating fiber decreases blood sugar and insulin concentrations.   The recommended amount of fiber is around 30 grams per day.  Most Americans get around 6-8 grams, which is not nearly enough.   While you can take fiber supplements like Metamucil (psylium husk), the best way to reach your goal is to eat your veggies!  Barley is a high-fiber, high-protein grain which has lots of data to support its role in helping improve blood sugar, insulin, cholesterol and general inflammation.  Barley does not requiring soaking and usually can cook in less than 15 minutes on the stove top with just some water and salt. 
3. Chromium
Mainly found in brewer’s yeast, deficiency in chromium impairs the metabolism of glucose.  Evidence supports chromium for lower blood sugar and A1c levels.  Be careful if you have kidney disease with this supplement. 
4. Zinc
Those with diabetes are commonly found to be zinc deficient.  Studies have shown zinc supplementation can reduce blood sugar and A1C, have an antioxidant effect, lower blood sugar and even help treat some of the complications related to diabetes.   Large doses of zinc can inhibit the absorption of other minerals like copper, so be sure to ask for guidance of the appropriate dosing. 
5. Aloe Vera
The sap of aloe vera is known for its laxative effect.  Therefore, make sure to get the juice of the gel! There is increasing evidence for use of the gel, which is the mucilaginous material inside the leaves.  Be sure that any product you buy is free of aloin or anthraquinones to avoid finding yourself in the bathroom!
6. Berberine
This is one of my all-time favorite botanicals found in plants such as goldenseal, barberry, Oregon grape root and Coptis.  Current evidence supports its use for decreasing blood sugar and hba1c. Be aware that this herb can interfere with metabolism of traditional pharmaceuticals and should never be taken while pregnant. 
7. Cinnamon
A medically beneficial indulgence to help lower your blood sugar and cholesterol levels. 
8. Fenugreek
A seed commonly used as a food spice has been used abroad for centuries for its medical benefits to lower cholesterol and hba1c.  If your urine smells like maple syrup, not to worry, this is a known side effect and is harmless. 
9. Gymnema
Used for centuries in India, evidence is catching up to its medical use showing benefits for glucose metabolism, insulin levels and as an adjunct to improve the results of traditional pharmaceuticals.  Be aware, because this botanical works synergistically with your meds, you must monitor your blood sugar closely to avoid having hypoglycemia. 
10. Nopal
Ever see nopales at your favorite Mexican restaurant?   Now you can order them and, rest assured, you’re choosing a food that help lower your blood sugar.  Nopales are the pads of the prickly pear cactus and when cooked right are delicious!  I personally like eating them with eggs or as a salad.


Diabetes hereditary:
Type 2 diabetes is caused by both genetic and environmental factors.Scientists have linked several gene mutations to a higher diabetes risk. 
Not everyone who carries a mutation will get diabetes. However, many people with diabetes do have one or more of these mutations.
It can be difficult to separate genetic risk from environmental risk. The latter is often influenced by your family members. 
For example, parents with healthy eating habits are likely to pass them on to the next generation. On the other hand, genetics plays a big part in determining weight. Sometimes behaviors can’t take all the blame.


Insulin:
A hormone produced in the pancreas by the islets of Langerhans, which regulates the amount of glucose in the blood. The lack of insulin causes a form of diabetes. An animal-derived or synthetic form of insulin used to treat diabetes
Insulin range:Insulin Level (SI Units*) Fasting. < 25 mIU/L. < 174 pmol/L. 30 minutes after glucose administration. 30-230 mIU/L.

Mental health:
Mental health conditions - just like diabetes - are treatable. Having both at the same time doesn’t make either one less treatable, they just require different treatments. 
Ask your diabetes care team about a referral to a mental health care provider like a psychiatrist, psychologist or therapist. Together, your doctors can help you find a treatment plan that works for your mind and body to be as healthy as possible.

Ecological factors?:
Environmental factors play a role in the etiopathogenesis of diabetes. They include polluted air, soil, water, unhealthy diet, stress, lack of physical activity, vitamin-D deficiency, exposure to enteroviruses, and damage to immune cells.


Lower blood sugar level at home naturally:
Exercise Regularly, Control Your Carb Intake, Increase Your Fiber Intake, Drink Water and Stay Hydrated, Implement Portion Control, Choose Foods With a Low Glycemic Index, Control Stress Levels, Monitor Your Blood Sugar Levels, Get Enough Quality Sleep, Eat Foods Rich in Chromium and Magnesium, Try Apple Cider Vinegar


How can diabetes affect the feet:
Diabetes is a disease that causes faulty or insufficient insulin production or low sensitivity to insulin. Insulin is an essential hormone that is responsible for helping cells absorb sugar from the blood to use for energy.
When this process does not work correctly, sugar remains circulating in the blood, causing health problems. Prolonged periods of high sugar levels in the blood can damage many areas of the body, including the feet.

Is diabetes is related to cancer:
Type 2 diabetes is associated with increased risks for several cancers, including colon,1 postmenopausal breast,2 pancreatic,3 liver,4 endometrial,5 and bladder6 cancers and non-Hodgkins lymphoma. Type 2 diabetes is also linked to a modest decrease in the risk for prostate cancer.


Diabetes related Conditions/what diabetes can do:
Nerve Pain and Diabetes, Nerve pain caused by diabetes, known as diabetic peripheral neuropathy, can be severe, constant, and hard to treat. 
Controlling your blood sugar can make a big difference, Eye Problems and Diabetes, Skin Conditions and Diabetes
Skin conditions related to this disease are common. Fortunately, most can be successfully treated before they turn into a serious problem. The key is to catch them early.

Kidney Disease and Diabetes
Diabetic nephropathy -- kidney disease that results from diabetes -- is the No. 1 cause of kidney failure. Learn the symptoms, how it's diagnosed, and how to treat it.



What Is Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young:Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare kind of diabetes that runs in families. Like type 1 and type 2 diabetes, MODY affects the way your body uses and stores sugar from food. But treatment can be different, so it's important to get the right diagnosis.


How Is MODY Treated?
There are different types of MODY based on which of your genes has a mutation. Your treatment depends on which kind you have:MODY 1 and MODY 4. They're usually treated with sulfonylureas, a type of diabetes medication. These drugs cause your pancreas to make more insulin. Some people with MODY 1 and MODY 4 may also need to take insulin.
MODY 2. This disease is usually managed through diet and exercise. You usually don't have to take medicine.
MODY 3. At first, this form of the disease can be treated through diet. Over time, you may need sulfonylureas and then insulin.
MODY 5. You'll need to take insulin to treat it. This rare form of MODY can harm other organs, such as your kidneys. You'll need treatment for complications, such as kidney cysts or kidney failure.MODY 6. This type tends to appear later in life, around age 40. You'll get treated with insulin.




How many days require to cure/reverse diabetes:
Three Weeks
Among the 652 people studied, 240 were “new diabetics,” that is, they had only recently been diagnosed with the disease; they were not yet taking any medications. Within an average of three weeks at Pritikin, the blood sugar (glucose) levels of these newly diagnosed diabetics had fallen from an average of 164 mg/dL to 124.Among the diabetics who were taking oral drugs (197 in total), the great majority, 71%, had lowered their blood sugar to the point where the drugs were no longer needed, and were discontinued. (At the time, 1994, a fasting glucose below 140mg/dL meant you no longer had diabetes. Today, the threshold is below 126 mg/dL.)

What is BMI:
Body Mass Index (BMI) is a measure of body fat based on height and weight that applies to adult men and women.


Is diabetes related to age:
Diabetes is a serious disease, and it affects many older adults. People get diabetes when their blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. 
The good news is that you can take steps to delay or prevent type 2 diabetes, which is the most common form of the disease to develop in older adults. If you already have diabetes, there are steps you can take to manage the condition and prevent diabetes-related health problems.

government actions to fight against diabetes:
The War on Diabetes was declared in 2016 to rally a whole-of-nation effort to tackle diabetes and we have made headway with the various initiatives that were introduced. We have put together a summary report that outlines our journey and progress thus far. There is still much more to be done and with your support, we will continue to push on and fight diabetes as a nation.The Ministry of Health (MOH), in collaboration with the Institute of Policy Studies (IPS), embarked on the Citizens’ Jury (CJ) for the War on Diabetes to mobilise citizens to raise awareness about diabetes and generate community-based recommendations on how to better prevent and manage diabetes as a nation. Such deliberative engagement models are premised on the belief that citizens can contribute meaningfully to the co-creation and co-delivery of approaches on issues of significance to them and the community.
Over a span of seven weeks (November 2017 to January 2018), participants sought advice from subject matter experts. They discussed and debated ideas and proposals among themselves, to come to a consensus on the recommendations that they, as a Jury, wanted to put forth.



Medication for diabetes prescribe:
metformin (Glucophage, Glumetza, others). Generally, metformin is the first medication prescribed for type 2 diabetes. 
Sulfonylureas. 
Meglitinides. 
Thiazolidinediones. 

Ayurvedic Medicines for diabetes:
Gymnema Sylvestre (Gurmar), Coccinia Indica, Azadirachta Indica (Neem), Morus Indica (Mulberry), Momordica Charantia (Bitter Gourd), Eugenia Jambolana, Trigonella Foenum (Fenugreek)



Top 15 Best Diabetes Treatment Hospitals in India:
1. All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Delhi. 
2. M.V. Hospital for Diabetes, Chennai.
3. Dr. Mohan’s Diabetes Specialties Center, Chennai.
4. Breach Candy Hospital, Mumbai.
5. Indraprastha Apollo Hospital, Delhi.
6. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai
7. Medanta – The Medicity, Delhi
8. Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh
9. Dr. A. Ramchandran’s Diabetes Hospital, Chennai
10. Agada Hospital, Chennai
11. Sancheti Hospital, Pune
12. Nidhi Hospital, Ahmedabad
13. Bangalore Diabetes Center, Bengaluru
14. Lakeshore Hospital & Research Center, Kochi
15. KEM Hospital, Pune




best doctors in world to treat diabetes in world:
10. University of Washington Medical Center (Seattle, WA)
9. UCLA Medical Center (Los Angeles, CA)
8. Northwestern Memorial Hospital (Chicago, IL)
7. Yale-New Haven Hospital (New Haven, CT)
6. New York-Presbyterian University Hospital of Weill Cornell (New York, NY)
5. UCSF Medical Center (San Francisco, CA)
4. Johns Hopkins Hospital (Baltimore, MD)
3. Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston, MA)
2. Cleveland Clinic (Cleveland, OH)
1. Mayo Clinic (Rochester, MN)
